# Financial System and Economic Development

The financial system plays a significant role in the process of economic development of a country. The financial system comprises of a network of commercial banks. Non-banking companies, development banks and other financial and investment institutions offer a variety of financial products and services to suit to the varied requirements of different categories of people. Since they function in a fairly developed capital and money markets, they play a crucial role in spurring economic growth in the following ways:

1. Mobilising savings: The financial system mobilises the savings of the people by offering appropriate incentives and by deepening and widening the financial structure. In other words, the financial system creates varieties of forms of savings so that savings can take place according to the varying asset preferences of different classes of savers. In the absence of the financial system, all savings would remain idle in the hands of the savers and they would not have flown into productive ventures.

2. Promoting investments: For the economic growth of any nation, investment is absolutely essential. This investment has to flow from the financial system. In fact, the level of investment determines the increase in output of goods and services and incomes in the country. The financial system collects the savings and channels them into investment which contributes positively towards economic development. 

3. Encouraging investment in financial assets: The dynamic role of the financial system in the economic development is that it encourages savings to flow into financial assets (money and monetary assets) as against physical assets (land, gold and other goods and services). The investments in physical assets are speculative and would breed inflation. On the other hand, investment in financial assets are non-inflationary in nature and would aid growth in the economy. The larger the proportion of the financial assets, the greater is the scope for economic growth in the long run.

4. Allocating savings on the basis of national priorities: Above all, the financial system allocates the savings in a more efficient manner so that the scarce capital may be more efficiently utilised among the various alternative investments. In other words, it gives preference to certain sectors, from the social and economic point of view, on the basis of national priorities.

5. Creating credit: Large financial resources are needed for the economic development of a nation. These resources are supplied by the financial system not only in the form of liquid cash but also in the form of 'created money' or 'deposit money' by creating credit and thereby making available large resources to finance trade, production, distribution, etc. Thus, it accelerates economic growth by facilitating the transactions of trade, production and distribution on a large-scale.

6. Providing a spectrum of financial assets: The financial system spectrum of financial assets so as to meet the varied requirements and preferences of households. Thus, it enables them to choose their asset portfolios in such a way as to achieve a preferred mix of return, liquidity and risk. Thus, it contributes to the economie development of a country.

7. Financing trade, industry and agriculture: All the financial institutions operating in a financial system take all efforts to ensure that no worthwhile project-be it in trade or agriculture or industry-suffers due to lack of funds. Thus, they promote industrial and agricultural development which have a greater say on the economic development of a country.

8. Encouraging entrepreneurial talents: The financial institutions encourage the managerial and entrepreneurial talents in the economy by promoting the spirit of enterprise and risk-taking capacity. They also furnish the necessary technical consultancy services to the entrepreneurs so that they may succeed in their innovative ventures.

9. Providing financial services: Sophistication and innovations have started appearing in the arena of financial intermediations as well. The financial institutions play a very dynamic role in the economic development of a country not only as a provider of finance, but also as a departmental store of finance by offering varieties of innovative financial products and services to meet the ever-increasing demands of their clients both corporates and individuals.

10. Developing backward areas: The integral policy of the national development plans of every country concentrates on the development of relatively less developed areas called backward areas. The financial institutions provide a package of services, infrastructure and incentives conducive to a healthy growth of industries in such backward areas and thus, they contribute for the uniform development of all regions in a country.