# Action Plan for Handling HR Shortages and Surpluses

## Action Plans for Shortage

1. **Improve the recruiting process:**
   Recruitment has become a large issue as a result of the labour shortage, therefore, it's more important than ever to hire efficiently and train new employees comprehensively. Keeping your company on the map through the use of strategic social media and job board posts will prove invaluable during this time.

2. **Upgrade the training process:**
   Training new employees efficiently is equally essential to retain new hires. Utilizing knowledgeable employees and regular training sessions is a great way to encourage workers while building their skill sets for the job.

3. **Re-examine your management style:**
   One considerable reason worker is choosing to leave their job is because of the poor management style of their superiors. The wrong approach to management can easily lead to unhappy employees with no reason or inclination to stay at their current job.

4. **Encourage and offer opportunities for development and growth:**
   Along with quality leadership and training, workers value the opportunity to grow in their field as well. A report from TINY pulse states that workers who feel a progression in their career at work are 20% more likely to still be working there a year later.

5. **Improve the work environment and offer superior benefits:**
   Toxic work environments are one of the main reason’s employees are unhappy, and, ultimately, leave their job. Creating a healthy workplace, along with offering quality benefits, not only shows a dedication to the well-being of workers but is also a significant way to stand out in the job market as it continues to expand. Forbes reports that 89% of workers at companies with well-being initiatives are more likely to recommend their company to others and that positive word-of-mouth could prove invaluable at this time.

6. **Automate where you can:**
   Another approach to overcome the labour shortage is to invest in technology that can help your company. Automation may not only decrease the amount of labour necessary to complete certain tasks but may also increase productivity within the company by assisting current employees with their undertakings as well.

While a variety of reasons have led to the ongoing labour shortage plaguing the workforce, it is up to individual businesses to re-examine and modify their approach to attracting and maintaining workers. At a time of constant instability, being considerate of employees and actively taking steps to improve your place of work will be your most beneficial line of defence against this issue.


## Action plans or decisions in case of a surplus

1. **Layoffs:**
   Reducing a labour surplus via layoffs may seem obvious, but a lot depends on the cause of the surplus. When excess staff results from permanent market changes, letting employees go may be your best response. If reasons for the surplus are temporary, consider the costs of hiring and training compared to the expense of retaining staff.

2. **Outsourcing:**
   If you regularly use employment agencies to cover your staffing needs, discontinuing this in times of a labour surplus is obvious. In fact, if your business is subject to fluctuating staffing needs, using outsourced staff during labour deficits can smooth out your need for permanent employees.

3. **Retraining:**
   Some labour surpluses are across the board, affecting all departments. If this is not the case, however, then redistributing excess staff may be an option. Retraining employees who are already familiar with the culture of your enterprise offers present and future flexibility at a fraction of the expense that new hires cost.

4. **Hiring Freeze:**
   For large organizations with many departments and an equally large workforce, implementing a hiring freeze can help prevent aggravating a labour surplus. With a freeze in place, managers downstream must explore other options to fill their labour needs without adding to the overall company payroll.

5. **Buyouts and Retirement:**
   Although it may not be a good short-term solution, offering early retirement or contract buyouts may produce sufficient attrition to reduce your labour surplus. There are potential financial benefits as well, since employees near retirement age may be toward the top of the wage scale. Depending on your company’s accounting methods, buyouts may come out of the operational budget, improving departmental performance.

6. **Pay Cuts:**
   Though it’s all but certain to have a negative effect on morale, across-the-board pay cuts may produce savings in wages that permit you to weather a labour surplus without layoffs. Wage reductions can be temporary or permanent but be sure to consider what this action may do to your company’s employment brand and labour relations.

7. **Modified Plans:**
   In this age of increased emphasis on work/life balance, you may have employees who might welcome reduced hours or work-from-home arrangements. Offering a leave of absence could help smooth out a temporary surplus. Although reduced hours may have the same net effect as a pay cut, reducing the hours may be better received by staff, who will see that their wage rate has been maintained.

8. **Seasonal Hiring Policies:**
   When your business experiences regular and predictable labour surpluses, plan accordingly during hiring periods, bringing aboard new hires only for the labour deficit period. You may be able to build a regular seasonal staff, as well as a pool of potential permanent workers, should the demand arise.
